# Flight Delays Data Exploration
## by Jaime Auger


## Dataset

Airport delay statistics obtained from: (https://www.transtats.bts.gov/OT_Delay/OT_DelayCause1.asp)

Starting Columns:
-year
-month: as a number.
-carrier: Airline abbreviation.
-carrier_name: Airline name.
-airport: Airport abbreviation.
-airport_name: Airport name. The information in this column was split to obtained the state and city of the airport.
-arr_flights: Number of flights which arrived at the airport.
-arr_del15: Number of flights delayed for more than 15minutes.
-carrier_ct: Number of flights delayed due to air carrier.
-weather_ct: Number of flights delayed due to weather conditions.
-nas_ct: Number of flights delayed due to National Aviation System.
-security_ct: Number of flights delayed due to security.
-late_aircraft_ct: Number of flights delayed due to a previous flight using the same aircraft being late.
-arr_cancelled: Number of cancelled flights.
-arr_diverted: Number of diverted flights.
-arr_delay: Total time of delayed flights in minutes.
-carrier_delay: Total time of delayed flights due to air carrier in minutes.
-weather_delay: Total time of delayed flights due to weather in minutes.
-nas_delay: Total time of delayed flights due to National Aviation System in minutes.
-security_delay: Total time of delayed flights due to security in minutes.
-late_aircraft_delay: Total time of delayed flights due to a previous flight using the same aircraft being late in minutes.

During the data wrangling process some of the following procedures:
-Eliminate white-spaces from column names.
-Deleted the rows with NA values because its quantity was negligible.
-A new variable month_ch was made from month but as character type.
-Deleted the rows before year==2004 and after year==2020 to analyze only complete annual data.
-The state and city was extracted from the airport_name column.
-New variables were created from all variables that was possible to build a ratio in %
-All instances with a delayed time per flight greater than 400 minutes because were outliers.
-Built a new dataset with the melt function to make each observation from a different type of delay and easy the visualization process.
This reduce the instances/rows of the data set from 294237 to 283129 observations


## Summary of Findings

The univariate analysis studied the distribution of the variables of the flight delay durations, the number of flights delayed for more than 15 min, the delay durations for each delayed flight and the percentages of delayed, canceled and diverted flights. . In the vast majority, a clear normal distribution skewed to the left was found, but in the second variable analyzed, only two exponentially decreasing behaviors were found from 1 and 20 delayed flights, respectively.

Regarding the Bivariate analysis, this analyzed the evolution of the percentages of delayed, canceled and diverted flights throughout the months of the year. This demonstrated a very similar marked seasonality between the retarded and the deviant. The percentage of canceled flights also presented seasonality but different from the previous variables. The average number and average duration of delayed flights were also analyzed by type of delay, where it was discovered that although delays by NAS were more recurrent than those by carrier, they were shorter than the latter. The most important bivariate analysis was carried out by analyzing the delay type variable over time from year to year, where there was a decrease in the number of delayed flights for most of the causes of delay until 2017. This could be due to a logistical improvement over time, especially referring to the type of delay NAS. The low number of delays throughout 2020 is due to the low number of flights made as a cause of the covid-19 pandemic. The same variable was analyzed month by month. The annual graph shows an abrupt rise in delays with respect to carrier and NAS, a direct consequence of the pandemic as more exhaustive sanitation protocols were added. This is justified with a lower number of delayed flights by late_aircraft since due to the pandemic the number of flights has been abysmally reduced and there is not so much demand so there are more unoccupied plans. You can also see a steady increase in the number of delays caused by late_aircraft until 2019. While in the second graph made on the month variable, it is useful to determine if there are seasonality, especially for the type of weather delay that presents its lowest values ​​on average in the months of March, April, September and October. This is because, apparently, it is the fall and spring times with the least problems generated by the weather. On the other hand, delayed flights by carrier present their highest value in July and the lowest in September. The states and airlines with the highest and lowest percentages of delayed, canceled and diverted flights were then estimated.

Finally, in the multivariate analysis, it was studied how the variables delayed_ct, delayed_ct_ratio, delayed_min and delayed_min_ratio were affected depending on what type of delay (carrier, weather, etc.) where it was concluded that the greater the number of flights, the types of different delays increase systematically but on a different scale regardless of security type of delay which duration is almost negligible all time. Finally, the existence of seasonality was analyzed for the number of delayed flights and the duration of flight delays, for each type of delay. The discovery was the seasonality discovered for the quantity of flights delayed by carrier, late_aircraft, nas and, with less strength, weather. Conversely, for the variable of duration of delays, there was not a clear seasonality but the level of each type of delay was different, not like the case for count of delays where they took the same values ​​on months like May and August.

## Key Insights for Presentation

The main changes to visualizations for the Presentation was to set new axis, labels, legend and reset the size of some visuals to highlight the most important point of each distribution or relationship.
